v24.3.0-alpha.1 release notes (#18985)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v24.3/v24.3.0-alpha.1.md

## v24.3.0-alpha.1

Release Date: October 9, 2024

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}
<h3 id="v24-3-0-alpha-1-security-updates">Security updates</h3>

- URLs in the [`CREATE CHANGEFEED`]({% link v24.3/create-changefeed.md %}) and [`CREATE SCHEDULE FOR CHANGEFEED`]({% link v24.3/create-schedule-for-changefeed.md %}) SQL statements are now sanitized of any secrets before being written to unredacted [logs]({% link v24.3/logging.md %}). [#126970][#126970]

> - The LDAP [cluster settings]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) `server.ldap_authentication.client.tls_certificate` and `server.ldap_authentication.client.tls_key` do not have callbacks installed to reload the settings value for LDAP authManager. This change fixes this by adding the necessary callbacks. [#131151][#131151]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The LDAP [cluster settings]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) `server.ldap_authentication.client.tls_certificate` and `server.ldap_authentication.client.tls_key` did not have callbacks installed to reload the settings value for LDAP authManager. This change fixed this by adding the necessary callbacks. [#131151][#131151]
```

- CockroachDB will now avoid [logging]({% link v24.3/logging.md %}) unnecessary stack traces while executing [scheduled jobs]({% link v24.3/show-jobs.md %}). [#129846][#129846]
- Upgrading to 24.3 is blocked if no license is installed, or if a trial/free license is installed with telemetry disabled. [#130576][#130576]
- Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License. [#131661][#131661]
- Attempting to install a second Enterprise trial license on the same cluster will now fail. [#131422][#131422]
- Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License (CSL). [#131690][#131690]
- Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License (CSL). [#131686][#131686]
- Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License (CSL). [#131688][#131688]
- Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License (CSL). [#131687][#131687]
- Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License (CSL). [#131717][#131717]

> - Changed the license `cockroach` is distributed under to the new CockroachDB Software License (CSL). [#131689][#131689]

Author: @rmloveland For each of these, should we update which license it was changed from as per the PR description?

Author: OK cool, thanks Rich. It looked like there were a number of existing licenses. Your idea makes sense I will do this!

- The new [cluster setting]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) `kv.range.range_size_hard_cap` allows you to limit how large a [range]({% link v24.3/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-range) can grow before [backpressure]({% link v24.3/common-errors.md %}#split-failed-while-applying-backpressure-are-rows-updated-in-a-tight-loop) is applied. This can help to mitigate against a situation where a range cannot be split, such as when a range is comprised of a single key due to an issue with the schema or workload pattern or a bug in client application code. The default is 8 GiB, which is 16 times the default max range size. If you have changed the max range size, you may need to adjust this cluster setting or reduce the range size. [#129450][#129450]
- The following `kvflowcontrol` [metrics]({% link v24.3/metrics.md %}) have been renamed. After a cluster is finalized on v24.3, old and new metrics will be populated. The previous metrics under `kvasdmission.flow_controller` will be removed.

      Old metric names                                                     | New metric names
      ---------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------

>       `kvadmission.flow_controller.(regular|elastic)_tokens_available`     | `kvflowcontrol.tokens.eval.(regular|elastic).available`

Author: @mdlinville I can't get this to render.

Reviewer: From my testing, you can either have
(1) a pipe character by using `&#124;` or  &vert; WITHOUT the backticks for code formatting
OR
(2) have the backticks for code formatting AND replace the pipe with another character, like a forward slash

``` 
      Old metric names                                                     | New metric names
      ---------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------
      kvadmission.flow_controller.(regular&#124;elastic)_tokens_available     | kvflowcontrol.tokens.eval.(regular&vert;elastic).available
      `kvadmission.flow_controller.(regular/elastic)_tokens_deducted`      | `kvflowcontrol.tokens.eval.(regular/elastic).deducted`
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks for showing me that workaround! I could also have wrapped the pipes within `{% raw %}...{% endraw %}`. I thought I was safe within backticks. Actrually I may have been, it looks like I also did not properly close the first cell in the table for example. In this situation the best solution is to fully-qualify the old and new metric names.

- The following new [metrics]({% link v24.3/metrics.md %}) show connection latency for each SQL authentication method:

      Authentication method | Metric
      ----------------------|-------
      Certificate           | `auth_cert_conn_latency`
      Java Web Token (JWT)  | `auth_jwt_conn_latency`
      Kerberos GSS          | `auth_gss_conn_latency`
      LDAP                  | `auth_ldap_conn_latency`
      Password              | `auth_password_conn_latency`
      SCRAM SHA-256         | `auth_scram_conn_latency`

      [#131578][#131578]

- Verbose logging of slow [Pebble]({% link v24.3/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#pebble) reads can no longer be enabled via the shorthand flag `--vmodule=pebble_logger_and_tracer=2`, where `pebble_logger_and_tracer` contains the CockroachDB implementation of the logger needed by Pebble. Instead, you must list the Pebble files that contain the log statements. For example  `--vmodule=reader=2,table=2`. [#127066][#127066]
- The lowest admission control priority for the storage layer has been renamed from `ttl-low-pri` to `bulk-low-pri`. [#129564][#129564]

> - New clusters will now have a zone config defined for the `timeseries` range, which specifies `gc.ttlseconds` and inherits all other attributes from the zone config of the `default` range. This zone config will also be added to a cluster that is [upgraded]({% link v24.3/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}) to v24.3 if it does not already have a zone config defined.[#128032][#128032]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New clusters will now have a [zone configuration](]({% link v24.3/show-zone-configuration.md %}) defined for the `timeseries` range, which specifies `gc.ttlseconds` and inherits all other attributes from the zone config of the `default` range. This zone config will also be added to a cluster that is [upgraded]({% link v24.3/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}) to v24.3 if it does not already have a zone config defined.[#128032][#128032]
```

- Updated the icon for notification alerts to use the new CockroachDB logo. [#130333][#130333]
- The `txn.restarts.writetoooldmulti` metric was rolled into the `txn.restarts.writetooold` metric in the v24.1.0-alpha.1 release. `txn.restarts.writetoooldmulti` has now been removed altogether. [#131642][#131642]
- The grants table in the [DB Details]({% link v24.3/ui-databases-page.md %}#databases) page will now show the database level grants. For example, when clicking a database in the databases list. Previously, it showed grants per table in the database. [#131250][#131250]
- Added new database pages that are available from the side navigation **Databases** link. [#131594][#131594]
- The [DB Console]({% link v24.3/ui-overview.md %}) will reflect any throttling behavior from the cluster due to an expired license or missing telemetry data. Enterprise licenses are not affected. [#131326][#131326]
- Users can hover over the node/region cell in multi-region deployments to view a list of nodes the database or table is on. [#130704][#130704]

> - The [**Databases** pages]({% link v24.3/ui-databases-page.md %}) in the DB console have been updated to read cached metadata about database and table storage statistics. The cache update time is now displayed in the top right-hand corner of the database and tables list pages. Users may trigger a cache refresh with the **refresh** icon next to the last updated time. The cache will also update automatically when users visit a **Databases** page and the cache is >= 20m old. [#131463][#131463]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [**Databases** pages]({% link v24.3/ui-databases-page.md %}) in the DB console have been updated to read cached metadata about database and table storage statistics. The cache update time is now displayed in the top right-hand corner of the database and tables list pages. Users may trigger a cache refresh with the **refresh** icon next to the last updated time. The cache will also update automatically when users visit a **Databases** page and the cache is older than or equal to 20 minutes. [#131463][#131463]
```

- The [`SHOW SESSIONS`]({% link v24.3/show-sessions.md %}) command was changed to include an `authentication_method` column in the result. This column will show the method used to authenticate the session, for example, `password`, `cert`, `LDAP`, etc. [#131625][#131625]

<h3 id="v24-3-0-alpha-1-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

- [Events]({% link v24.3/eventlog.md %}) `DiskSlownessDetected` and `DiskSlownessCleared` are now logged when disk slowness is detected and cleared on a store. [#127025][#127025]
- Several [cluster settings]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) allow you to configure rate-limiting traffic to cloud storage over various protocols. These settings begin with `cloudstorage`. [#127207][#127207]
- The new [cluster setting]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) `kv.range.range_size_hard_cap` allows you to limit how large a [range]({% link v24.3/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-range) can grow before being split. The default is 8 GiB, which is 16 times the default max range size. If you have changed the max range size, you may need to adjust this cluster setting or reduce the range size. [#129450][#129450]

> - The following `kvflowcontrol` [metrics]({% link v24.3/metrics.md %}) have been renamed. After a cluster is finalized on v24.3, old and new metrics will be populated. The previous metrics under `kvasdmission.flow_controller` will be removed.

Reviewer 2: @kvoli PTAL

Reviewer 3: LGTM

      `kvadmission.flow_controller.(regular|elastic)_requests_errored`     | `kvflowcontrol.eval_wait.(regular|elastic).requests.errored`
      `kvadmission.flow_controller.(regular|elastic)_requests_bypassed`    | `kvflowcontrol.eval_wait.(regular|elastic).requests.bypassed`
      `kvadmission.flow_controller.(regular|elastic)_wait_duration`        | `kvflowcontrol.eval_wait.(regular|elastic).duration`

      [#130167][#130167]
- The new `ranges.decommissioning` [metric]({% link v24.3/metrics.md %}) shows the number of ranges with a replica on a [decommissioning]({% link v24.3/node-shutdown.md %}) node. [#130117][#130117]
- New [cluster settings]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) have been added which control the refresh behavior for the cached data in Databases pages of the [DB Console]():
      - `obs.tablemetadatacache.data_valid_duration`: the duration for which the data in `system.table_metadata` is considered valid before a cache reset will occur. Default: 20 minutes.
      - `obs.tablemetadatacache.automatic_updates.enabled`: whether to automatically update the cache according the validity interval. Default: `false`.

      [#130198][#130198]

> - New gauge [metrics]({% link v24.3/metrics.md %}) `security.certificate.expiration.{cert-type}` and `security.certificate.ttl.{cert-type}` show the expiration and TTL for a certificate. [#130110][#130110]

Reviewer 2: @angles-n-daemons PTAL

Reviewer 4: lgtm, thank you

- Added a LDAP authentication method to complement password-based login for the DB Console if HBA configuration has an entry for LDAP for the user attempting login, along with other matching criteria (like the requests originating IP address) for authentication to the DB Console. [#130418][#130418]
- Added timers around key parts of the [changefeed]({% link v24.3/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) pipeline to help debug feeds experiencing issues. The `changefeed.stage.<stage>.latency` metrics now emit latency histograms for each stage. The metric respects the [changefeed `scope` label]({% link v24.3/monitor-and-debug-changefeeds.md %}#using-metrics-labels) for debugging specific feeds. [#128794][#128794]
- For [enterprise changefeeds]({% link v24.3/how-does-an-enterprise-changefeed-work.md %}), [events]({% link v24.3/eventlog.md %}) `changefeed_failed` and `create_changefeed` now include a `JobId` field. [#131396][#131396]

> - The new [metric]({% link v24.3/metrics.md %}) `seconds_until_enterprise_license_expiry` allows you to monitor the status of a cluster's Enterprise license. [#129052][#129052].

Reviewer 2: @angles-n-daemons PTAL

Reviewer 4: Perfect, thanks!

- It is now possible to create PL/pgSQL trigger functions, which can be executed by a trigger in response to table mutation events. Note that this patch does not add support for triggers, only trigger functions. [#126734][#126734]
- Cluster settings enterprise.license and diagnostics.reporting.enabled have additional validation [#131097][#131097]
- The [`SHOW SESSIONS`]({% link v24.3/show-sessions.md %}) command was changed to include an `authentication_method` column in the result. This column will show the method used to authenticate the session, for example, `password`, `cert`, `LDAP`, etc. [#131625][#131625]

<h3 id="v24-3-0-alpha-1-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

- [Events]({% link v24.3/eventlog.md %}) `DiskSlownessDetected` and `DiskSlownessCleared` are now logged when disk slowness is detected and cleared on a store. [#127025][#127025]
- Several [cluster settings]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) allow you to configure rate-limiting traffic to cloud storage over various protocols. These settings begin with `cloudstorage`. [#127207][#127207]

> - The new [cluster setting]({% link v24.3/cluster-settings.md %}) `kv.range.range_size_hard_cap` allows you to limit how large a [range]({% link v24.3/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-range) can grow before [backpressure]({% link v24.3/common-errors.md %}#split-failed-while-applying-backpressure-are-rows-updated-in-a-tight-loop) is applied. This can help to mitigate against a situation where a range cannot be split, such as when a range is comprised of a single key due to an issue with the schema or workload pattern or a bug in client application code. The default is 8 GiB, which is 16 times the default max range size. If you have changed the max range size, you may need to adjust this cluster setting or reduce the range size. [#129450][#129450]

Reviewer 2: @arulajmani PTAL
